---
layout: post
title: Week 2
categories: Miscellaneous
---
### Today, I learnt:
1. Some built-in functions which I have not used thus far. - sum, min, max, len 
2. How to use import to tap on certain functions within Python libraries
3. Attributes of different data types. - append, extend, pop,  join for lists; split for strings

### What I learnt:  
**1. More type of built-in functions**
- sum( ), min( ), max( ), len( ) functions 
```python
practice_list=[3, 4, 5, 6, 7]
sum([3, 4, 5, 6, 7])
min(practice_list)
max(practice_list)
print(len(practice_list))
```
```python
practice_string='this is a string'
print(len(practice_string))
```  
    Here, I learnt how to use some more basic built-in functions. 
    - **sum( )** adds all the values within the list.
    - **min( )** of *practice_list* takes the lowest numbered element within the list
    - **max( )** of *practice_list* takes the highest numbered element within the list
    - **print(len(practice_list))** first uses len( ) to take the length of the *practice_list*, in this case which is 5 (the number of elements in list), and print( ) then prints the length, 5  
    - **print(len(practice_string))** first uses len( ) to take the length of the *practice_string*, in this case which is 16 (the number of characters in string), and print( ) then prints the length, 16 

**2. Import**  
There are many libraries that we can import from Python to use the functions within. Some examples are math, datetime, etc.
- We can **import *function* from *library***, e.g.import pi from math
- We can **import *library*** e.g. import math
- We can assign them to a variable, using **as**
```python
import math as m
from math import sqrt as s
s(m.pi)  
```  
>    - we imported the math library and assigned it a variable m
>    - from math we have the function square root and assigned it a variable s
>    - the last line, s(m.pi), gives the square root of pi, which we imported the value of pi from the library called math  

**3. Attributes**  
For different data types, there are different attributes.
- For lists, I learnt how to use **append, extend, pop** attributes
```python
practice_list=[3, 4, 5, 6, 7]
practice_list.append(10)
practice_list.append(11)
practice_list.append([12, 13, 14])
practice_list.extend([12, 13, 14])
practice_list.pop()
print(practice_list)
```  
    - **.append( )** attribute helps to insert the value(s) indicated within .append( ) at the back of a list.  
    - The 1st to 4th lines of code appends values and a list to *practice_list*, & in the end, the list of [3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 10, 11, [12, 13, 14]] is assigned to the variable *practice_list*  
    - The 5th line of code uses **.extend( )** to add the values within the list (without [ ]) into the *practice_list*. Now, the list of [3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 10, 11, [12, 13, 14], 12, 13, 14] is assigned to the variable *practice_list*
    - 6th line: **.pop( )** removes last object from the list. The value 14 is removed. [3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 10, 11, [12, 13, 14], 12, 13] is now assigned to the variable *practice_list* 
    - Last line: print( ) prints the *practice_list* which is now [3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 10, 11, [12, 13, 14], 12, 13]   
- For lists (of strings), I also learnt how to use **' '.join( )** 
```python
string_list=['this', 'is', 'a', 'string']
' '.join(string_list)
```  
    -  the **join** attribute joins multiple strings in a list into one longer string. Insert the delimiter within ' '.join, in this case it is a space, and join the strings (with the delimiter in between each of them) within the long string.  
- For strings, I learnt how to use **.split(' ')** attributes
```python
practice_string='this is a string'
print(practice_string.split('i'))
```
    - the **split** attribute splits up the string into a list of multiple smaller strings by the delimiter indicated within .split(' '), and removes the delimiter, in this case it is *i*
    - better to assign a variable to it e.g. texts = sentence.split(' ')
    - print( ) gives us output of ['th' 's ' 's a str' 'ng'] 