---
layout: post
title:  Week 8 - NumPy (Part I)
categories: Learning Python NumPy Practices Cheatsheets Reflections
---

Introduction to NumPy:  
1. np.array( )
2. Indexing
3. Conditions
4. np.zeros( ) , np.ones( )
5. np.arange( )
6. np.linspace( )
7. Python Lists vs NumPy Arrays  
  
## Cheatsheets

[NumPy Guide](https://numpy.org/doc/stable/user/absolute_beginners.html)

---

## What I learnt:  

### Introduction to NumPy  
  
NumPy: stands for Numerical Python  
- is a Python library    
- used to perform a wide variety of mathematical operations on arrays  
- also has functions for working in domain of linear algebra, fourier transform, and matrices.  
- to import NumPy,  

    ```python
    import numpy as np
    ```

### Array:  

Elements are all of the same type, i.e. array dtype.  

An array can be indexed by a tuple of nonnegative integers, by booleans, by another array, or by integers.  

Rank of the array: the number of dimensions  

Shape of the array: a tuple of integers giving the size of the array along each dimension   

- **np.array( )**:  
Initialize NumPy arrays from Python lists, using nested lists for two- or higher-dimensional data. e.g.:  
```python
a = np.array([1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6])
```
```python  
a = np.array([[1, 2, 3, 4], [5, 6, 7, 8], [9, 10, 11, 12]])
```  
- To **access the elements in the array**, use **indexing**:  
```python
print(a[0])
```  
_Output:_
```
[1, 2, 3, 4]
```  
- **Conditions**  
Example 1:
```python
a>3
```  
_Output:_
```
array([False, False, False, True])
```  
Example 2:
```python
a[a>3]
```  
_Output:_
```
array([4])
```
- **np.zeros( )**:  
Easily create an array filled with 0’s. e.g.:
```python
np.zeros(2)
```  
_Output:_
```
array([0., 0.])
```  
- **np.ones( )**:  
Easily create an array filled with 1’s. e.g.:
```python
np.ones(2)
```  
_Output:_
```
array([1., 1.])
```  
- **np.arange( )**:  
Create an array with a range of elements. e.g.:
```python
np.arange(4)
```  
_Output:_
```
array([0, 1, 2, 3])
```  
- **np.arange(first number, last number, step size)**:  
Create an array that contains a range of evenly spaced intervals. e.g.:
```python
np.arange(2, 9, 2)
```  
_Output:_
```
array([2, 4, 6, 8])
```  
- **np.linspace( )**:  
Create an array with values that are spaced linearly in a specified interval. e.g.:
```python
np.linspace(0, 10, num=5)
```  
_Output:_
```
array([ 0. ,  2.5,  5. ,  7.5, 10. ])
```  

### Python Lists vs NumPy Arrays  

For python lists, elements within lists in the same indexes cannot do **math operations** with one another quickly. It is possible using numpy arrays.  

- Without NumPy, using Python lists:  
```python
a_list=[1,2,3]
b_list=[2,4,6]
print(a_list+b_list)
print(a_list/b_list)
```  
_Output:_
```
[1,2,3,2,4,6]
```  
_Output:_
```
error
```  

- With NumPy, using Python lists:  
```python
np_list_1=np.array(a)
np_list_2=np.array(b)
print(np_list_1 + np_list_2)
print(np_list_1 / np_list_2)
```  
_Output:_
```
array([3,6,9])
```  
_Output:_
```
array([0.5,0.5,0.5])  
```  

---

## Thoughts

NumPy looks like it would come in handy in efficiently doing numerical calculations, while Python lists have limitations in doing the same.  

NumPy actually has more features, which I will probably learn and then share about them in future posts, so do keep a look out!